[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversation with tom i am here today
with somebody who is an extraordinary
thinker you guys are
going to want to buckle up for this one
we are joined by jamie wheel jamie
welcome
thanks for having me tom oh dude uh like
we were saying before we started rolling
super sad that this isn't happening in
person but so grateful that we at least
get a connect over skype um
your book
recapture the rapture is
is
a thrill ride it is uh
reading your books
and talking to you is like taking drugs
like i and i mean that in the most
positive way humanly possible but you
touch on things in a way that is so
radically different from the way that
everybody else looks at them
and
man you really
hit on something in recapture the
rapture so i'm going to do a really bad
job of summarizing the book
and then all the things that i get wrong
we're going to spend the next couple of
hours parsing through because i think
that
um
this is a really interesting guide post
for people in terms of what we're
dealing with right now so i want to read
the full title so the full title of the
book recapture the rapture rethinking
god sex and death in a world that's lost
its mind so first and foremost for
anybody that you know is uh with their
kids right now i have a fair warning you
may want to uh
be be cognizant that we will tread on
territory that is um
that is
interesting and adult at times in nature
um but
the okay so here's my quick synopsis of
the book and and we'll then parse out
where i go wrong so
first of all we've lost meaning in our
world and that has created sort of this
god-sized whole
and
capitalism and sort of classical
liberalism is failing to deliver the
solutions that we hoped would be there
in the absence of something like god
that you know this would spread out to
all humanity and would be this wonderful
utopia that has not quite worked out
and
if we look to our biological drivers
which is a huge part of the book and
part of the reason i'm so like thrilled
that you wrote this because to me so
often people don't acknowledge that
we're all having a biological experience
so if we look at sort of the realities
of our biology understand the drivers
that we have
then sort of this last
meaning 3.0 sense of understanding the
tools that we have understanding where
we've come from and what this loss of
meaning really means we have a chance to
use what you call cultural architecture
to build something new
that hopefully does not repeat the
mistakes of the past and we're going to
go into extreme detail on exactly how
you pull that off because you give a lot
of actionable ideas but did i get close
that's awesome
that's awesome yeah amazing so then i
have understood the book which was again
it was a total
um thrill ride you start with explaining
how basically the world is going to end
um
walk us through this have your attention
yeah right walk us through the loss of
meaning i think that's maybe the most
important thing for people to understand
yeah well i mean i think the simplest
thing to say is is is you haven't gone
crazy the world has
you know like we can all just exhale
that especially in this last year super
acutely but increasingly over the last
four or five years things have been
getting super weird and they've been
getting you know
exponentially weird in competing in
conflicting conflicting directions
so i told the story you got to see it i
was at a singular university conference
in johannesburg about future proofing
africa
and it was like there was this kind of
schizoid split between what was getting
discussed you know some of it was like
hey we can you know we can get
drinking water from clouds and we can
use desalination and we can use
blockchain to provide passports for
refugees so folks actually get to keep
their identities also it's a really
awesome innovative amazing thing to do
like whoa you know like things are
getting exponentially better and then
there was things on exponential biology
like crispr and exponential currencies
like like blockchain and exponential
education like online learning and
exponential transportation like uber
doing helicopter drone helicopters and
all this stuff and i'm like wait a
second
everything has happened everything's
going exponential
but the thing in the middle of how do we
make sense of all this exponential
meaning isn't keeping up
and you know the harvard biologist eo
wilson
he had a great description of this he
says
we have paleolithic emotions it's just
kind of how we are hardwired we're 50
000 years behind this curve
right we've got medieval institutions
and we've got god-like technology
and that sense that in our world right
now you know things are getting
exponentially better you know war wars
and poverty are down nutrition is up you
know all the all the good happy things
that stephen pinker talks about or if
you've seen those hans rosling ted talks
and you're like look at all the awesome
like yay i should be more optimistic
right
um and then you doom scroll your news
feed and your little mice like there's
fire and there's ebola and there's covet
and there's racism and there's sexism
and there's tribalism and there's
fascism and there's all the isms you
know all the time we're like oh no
things are getting exponentially worse
like which is it
and and it becomes totally crazy making
to try and toggle between those two
things and sort stuff out so most of us
because you know all animals but humans
especially we're lazy and we're seek we
seek efficiency
so like instead of always reinventing
the wheel we base things on predictions
like i'm going to open the door the same
way i opened it yesterday and it's going
to take the same amount of force to get
it across the carpet and get it to slam
shut behind me right so we're always
making
energy trade-offs and shortcuts based on
predictions so one of the things we do
is we look to authority figures
we say well what do the clever people
the smart people the people we trust the
people in power right that whether
that's academics or business people or
clergy or you know or social groups
whoever it is right we look to others to
help us make sense of all that
complexity efficiently and and so to
your point about meaning
at the same time everything's been going
hockey stick exponential in all
directions exponentially better
exponentially worse we've seen a
collapse in the two
most pervasive institutions benign
authority so that's the academics the
scientists right the the politicians you
know all the folks in secular society
we've seen the collapse in benign
authority but we've also seen a collapse
in divine authority organized religion
right and so as and in that we've seen
this kind of like giant
sucking vacuum
in the middle that's led to a meaning
crisis and so you know the pew research
foundation has recently found that you
know the
nuns the spiritual but not religious are
the largest and fastest growing you know
denomination in in america never been o
n e not n u n not little black habits
but n o n e's none of the aboves right
and and so that's novel never happened
before so fewer and fewer people are
kind of under the under the big tent of
church or synagogue or temple
right and at the same time we're seeing
a collapse in the promise of modern
liberalism the sort of hashtag burn it
all down ethos which is like wait um you
know we were told in seoul this is like
that tyler dude and fight club thing you
know we were we were told we were going
to grow up to be presidents and rock
stars and we're not and we're pissed
right and so we we see that like
meaning 1.0 like all of organized
religion for thousands of years
promised salvation like if you believed
you were saved you know but at the price
of inclusion like if you didn't believe
what we believed you were damned or you
were not part of the part of the party
right
french enlightenment onwards the kind of
modern liberal order and i don't mean
liberal as in democrat i mean liberal in
the sense of liberalism you know nation
states
democracy civil rights private property
like that kind of classical definition
um they tried something else because
they just come out of all the wars the
religious wars of europe and they're
like whoa whoa whoa let's not do any
more of that
let's do
inclusion let's take salvation off the
table it's super problematic let's do
inclusion so all men and women are
created to life liberty the pursuit of
happiness liberty equality
brotherhood all those good things
regardless of race color or creed so
meaning 2.0 said well let's do inclusion
but it came at the cost of salvation
because that's super problematic we're
not going to touch that third rail
so in this collapse right now like ever
we need to make sense of things more
than ever it's more complicated it's
moving faster and it's more
how consequential than ever
to make meaning out of things though
well i mean at the basic we're
storytelling monkeys
did you know and and then at a at a sort
of higher level we have to figure out
what to do
you know i always think of that george
clooney character and oh brother where
are that where he'd be like damn we're
in a tight spot right and like we're in
a tight spot there's there uh there are
intersecting overlapping and reinforcing
metacrisis happening right now
and so it's not just any single thing
and none of the challenges that we're
facing
stop or or respect zip codes or
political boundaries
right so we actually have to for the
first time in in humanity's life ever
expand our awareness beyond clint tribe
clan
faith and even beyond nation state
to a global perspective
where we interconnect and collaborate
together it's super hard it's really
fragile it's the boldest baddest ass
experiment we could ever hope for
but it's never been done and conditions
are getting tighter so the question is
right i wanna i wanna tease some of that
apart so
um we go to this becomes important
because we're meaning making machines
um we've relied on religion up until
this point to sort of give us that
meaning
science has
moved us probably been the biggest
contributor to the downfall of religion
i think you would agree with that
um and
now we have
we have to make a a heuristic we need
something that allows us to to shorthand
things and heuristic for anybody that's
never heard that word for a long time
it's stymied me it literally is like uh
rule of thumb so we have to have a rule
of thumb that so we know when we pull on
the door that it's going to take the
same amount of energy to drag it across
carpet like the things you were talking
about earlier so i'm trying to make
sense of my world super complicated my
brain literally compels me to tell a
story about what's happening i used to
be able to clock it with the scripture
i'm not able to do that anymore
and so
in a hyper-connected world where
in the book you refer to it as oh god
like fiber optic cable are neurons
something like that basically computers
sort of melt all the borders they bring
us together
because what i'm trying to figure out is
why
and look i think i know the answer from
reading the book but why do we have to
think globally is it
is it where you start the book which now
might be a good time to to talk about
the concept of choose your apocalypse um
is that why like is that the point like
hey it's it's an interconnected world
coupled with the loss of religion that
makes this necessary or is it something
else entirely
well i mean there's so many reasons why
but i think that the first is the
complex
intersecting
meta crisis
that we're facing and that so it's not
just give me some of those well it's not
just climactic and you know ice shelves
the size of new york coming into the
ocean and you know loss of polar bears
or this and that it's not just you know
wildfires and natural disasters it's not
just
the rise of
you know well i mean look we're talking
about potentially the end of the
american century and the rise of the
chinese you know we've seen all sorts of
geopolitical
you know moves on the chessboard uh in
the last few years we are in fact still
a nuclear world with a with a pile of
those floating around there's increasing
asymmetric technologies that can wipe us
all out accidentally or on purpose and
whether that's bio terror and gene
editing or crispr or you know or you
name it or you know or weaponize viruses
there's infinite amounts of that and
that's kind of never been
true the you know the the archetypal 400
pound guy in his you know in his mom's
basement with a laptop like that guy can
actually unplug the whole thing right
now that's never been that's never been
possible so the the um
the doomsday clock which was originally
created around nuclear weapons
um
let's broaden that now to all the things
that you just talked about or you know
lump them all together to sort of the
state of the world and the way that we
can destroy ourselves if you had to pick
a time
so it's you know how close to midnight
midnight being
what was originally sort of the nuclear
winter um how close to midnight do you
think we are
well i mean i defer to a bunch of smart
atomic scientists and and as i want to
make sure that we're not just talking
atomic stuff i'm talking about all of
that yeah yeah like meta-systemic risks
so
those guys as of 2020 and then they they
kept it the same for 2021 they said
we're at 90 seconds to midnight
and that's closer than during the cuban
missile crisis that's closer than any
any other time or event uh that we've
experienced since 1947.
so that alone is bracing you know and
there's been the un reports which have
been updated and saying hey we have 10
years to figure this out and whoops now
another year or two or three has gone by
and you know those dates may or may not
be
holding in general what's been happening
is that most forecasters in a specific
discipline right that could be antarctic
researchers or that could be political
analysts or that could be you know you
name it to take a pic of a specific
field
most of them have been running their
calculations
but understandably they're somewhat in
their silos and then typically what
happens is when they get to a conference
or they're doing something where they
swap notes with other people also
modeling other things they're like oh
didn't think of that one let's put
that back into our model and then you
have these kind of things where um i
mean
you know i am a creature of my time i
always think of like empire strikes back
right where those big hats come clunking
along and then they get whipped you know
whipped with the ropes and they're like
douche and then finally they fall over
and explode and we're kind of like we're
down on at least one knee right now and
so the question is
you know can we
muddle through this
you know it's tempting to be like oh
yeah
you know someone's always saying the end
is nigh right someone is always crying
doom and gloom and that's how they get
attention or followers or sell whatever
their solution is and that kind of thing
and that's that's a hundred percent
legit right the apocalyptic fantasy has
been around for thousands of years and
it just hasn't ever come on you're shown
up on time
so we really do have to like there's a
there's a high bar to say well
are we absolutely certain that we're not
just in another one of those
right every round number on the calendar
every big meteor event or strange you
know or volcanic eruption that's done
something wiggy or weird you know has
always prompted people to think and feel
and say these things and act accordingly
the only question is is is this
different
and are we are we actually like against
all odds is our generation the one who
kind of drew the golden ticket because
you know you mentioned you know a minute
to midnight right and
the thing that i you know that i think
is really interesting kurt vonnegut the
famous author who wrote cat's cradle he
wrote slaughterhouse five
he was actually studying anthropology at
the university of chicago and you can
google this you can look it up on
youtube he has a fun a cool lecture
about it but he talks about the shape of
stories he's like all stories have basic
shapes and they kind of fit in only to
in only a handful of buckets
and he's like you know the common one is
like rags to riches that's down rags
you're dirt poor then riches up so down
to up
and he's like and then there's kind of
the boy meets girl one which is like you
know they meet cute in the cafe and then
for stupid contrived reasons they they
fall apart so that's up then down and
then boom then they immediately they
well soft into this into the sunset so
so up then down then up again
and then he noticed he's like actually
though the one that we love the one we
cannot get enough of
is the cinderella story
and the cinderella story right is the
whole you know down you know like
stepsisters and sweeping ashes and
miserable stepmother
up you know bibbidi-bobbidi-boo fairy
godmothers and a wonderful gown and
dancing with the prince
midnight clang pumpkins you know lost
lost slipper and everything super duper
down
everything is lost
for the ultimate happily ever after ever
and so if you think well where are we in
our story back to us being storytelling
monkeys like we search for meaning and
we need narrative that explains where we
are and why
and therefore what we should do next
together
then we're at you know a minute before
midnight
and so we have to actually be willing to
lean into that drop it's like
skateboarding or snowboarding or
anything like you're standing on the lip
of something steep you don't fall back
away from it you actually have to lean
into it to stick the landing
and then what do we do and how do we get
to
the greatest like the best happily ever
after in the greatest story ever told
you know the history of humanity all
right so in the book you refer to the
omega point which i assume is what
you're referring to here um one thing
though before we get to that that i
think is important to cover is
you're careful in the book to say you
know the notion of just burning it all
down is very naive and to think that you
know you would be better off to burn it
down um and then rebuild something from
scratch is ignorant of history and you
talk about in fact i'd love to because i
don't remember the exact um stat but it
was like from the fall of rome until
some period in the future
the declaration of independence
so get give that whole stat because
that's very sobering
well yeah just just that you know in
whatever it was 80 400 a roundabouts you
know when the vandals sacked rome you
know it roughly took until the
declaration of independence 1776 for us
to get back to the same standard of
living
you know and you're like hmm man and so
when you hear
like seasteaders or cryptocurrency folks
or
alt-right accelerations i mean basically
accelerationists of any type and all
accelerationism means is let's actually
accelerate the unraveling let's not fix
stuff
because we are convinced that it the
sooner this all comes
comes apart
the quicker we're going to get the
chance to build our favorite utopia
and i think the reality is is just those
folks you know they're they're typically
single dudes
you know right i mean i mean you know in
the sense that they're they love to be
in their minds eye and they don't want
to have to deal with the hassles and the
complexity and the humanity
of what's right in front of us so then
they fantasize about a blank slate where
they get to build their perfect model
train set
and the reality is is like these guys
it's going to be a smoldering wreckage
you're never going to get to build your
perfect train set and some mad max
are going to come in and
run the joint you know
and your weak ass is not going to become
the new emperor you know so so those are
the kinds of things that
i think you know and it shows up it
shows up
anywhere it shows up on the
the the movements towards social justice
where they're like let's disassemble the
western canon let's stop teaching any of
the things that have
implicitly have you know racism or
oppression um you know implied or
inferred it's all that stuff
and
it just feels to me now granted there
are actual schisms happening right now
there are people that do not believe
in
a global humanist project that everyone
everywhere
should be entitled to life liberty in
the pursuit of happiness we're already
seeing the move into
tribalism
right where they're saying no no no
we're not even we're not even shooting
for that we're not even giving that lip
service we want to smash grab and win
and so
kind of buried in our current culture
wars and our current sense of crisis and
what to do about it and the anxiety and
the grief but also the rage
is
i think the simplest way to describe it
is it's a it's a contest
between playing the finite game right
win lose me and mine
versus recommitting to the infinite game
which is win-win and the point isn't to
end the game victorious the point is to
keep keep playing
for as long as possible
with as many people as possible
okay
right i'm gonna put a pin in that
because now we start getting into a part
of the book where
i
i really want to believe in your um the
omega point where we sort of all get it
we're willing to
um take that dip which i think you're
gonna need to define exactly what that
is but um you know that we come back on
the other side and we've got this sort
of humanitarian project and it's it's
all-encompassing but
the thing that i loved most about your
book which is hey you're having a
biological experience and you're so
honest about all right we have to take
into consideration that these are humans
humans act some kind of way they have a
brain it compels them to do some crazy
you go into a lot of stuff about
sex really powerful we will definitely
talk about that but the idea that
everyone is going to be willing and or
capable
of showing deference to
you know sort of humanity
all-encompassing without the arrival of
aliens which you actually talk about in
your book um
i
i don't think it's possible like i think
that that is so far outside of the realm
of reality that we crash into what you
were just talking about which is hey
everybody's got utopia on the mind
sounds great it's the experiment has
been run it hasn't worked um
everybody goes no no that it wasn't done
right you know socialism communism
whatever it just like let me give it a
shot and i'll show you how it works and
then you get to the problem about you
know your
um soft ass i believe is what you said
is not going to be elected emperor it's
going to be a hardcore that
comes in and is like yo mike makes right
smash and grab they do what they want
they run roughshod history
literally if people aren't looking at
history that's really terrifying because
it's people that have run a lot of
experiments for you to figure out
exactly how humans react in a given
situation and
when you create
destabilization
what rises is not peace and love what
rises is might
and uh
power and aggression and so that gets
real scary real fast so how do you think
through that like how do we what is the
drop let's start there and then how do
we make sure that people rebuild
something that makes sense not rebuild
that's not the right word because you're
very careful to say this is going to be
sort of additive layers versus
destruction so i want to understand in
in your world what is the drop
the cinderella story drop yes you said
we're you know we're a minute before
midnight we have to lean into the drop
what's the drop
well i mean the short answer is we can't
possibly know from here
right it's too complicated does it imply
something bad though like
some
yeah if i had to guess right i would say
we kind of run out of imaginary money
um we have to make transitions on energy
sources that
um
global i mean we've seen a lot of it in
the last four years you know accelerated
by accelerationists but the unraveling
and unwinding of a lot of global
treaties compacts cooperation and
probably a
retrenchment that's either you know
all-encompassing or just kind of a
little bit at a time and you don't
really kind of notice into
nationalism and even bioregionalism
so so there will be you know and then
quite likely an increase in intense
weather events
a potential impact on food supplies
increasing
tightness around natural resources and
obviously
excuse me obviously water is one of the
main ones um but you know we're at peak
sand right now right like saudi arabia
is importing sand from india and
australia to build with like you would
think sand what the hell go pound sand
right we literally use it as a total
pejorative we are running out of sand to
build
in the last three years china poured
more concrete than the united states did
in all of the 20th century whoa
yeah yeah you're like what i didn't even
know that was a thing you know and so
so yeah and you know now of course
there will be techno utopians who are
like ah that's just you know that's just
hysteria we always invent stuff we'll
create stuff and then they always trot
out the story of you know late 19th
century new york and chicago where up to
there is in cow i mean horseshit
you know and it was it was a big huge
problem and then we invented the
automobile but you're like yeah but we
also just figured out how to stick
straws in the ground and set on fire a
whole bunch of dead dinosaurs all at
once so we just like got this like
payload of millions of years of
accumulated starlight in the form of
compressed photosynthetic plant material
turned into petro
chemicals that we just set on fire
and that worked and it was like woohoo
and the question is it's just can we
make it to the next stepping stone in
the river
here's what's interesting to me about
that so
we haven't run out of oil yet so if this
is really people fighting over energy it
it begins to feel and here is maybe my
very fumbly thesis and i hope everybody
will forgive me for thinking out loud on
camera which is a very dangerous game in
today's world um but nonetheless i hope
that it helps you know somebody so
when i look at this i say okay i'm
really having a hard time reconciling
all the things that have gotten better
right that we're getting close to
eliminating global poverty um
and by by like pretty objective
standards and
that thing's you know the stephen pinker
argument or the matt ridley argument the
rational optimist that you know you're
looking at just year after year decade
after decade of progress it doesn't make
any sense to say oh all of a sudden
we're going to go backwards and
this feels without diminishing
the real problems that we have it feels
like our narrative about our problems
has become the problem and given rise to
what you're referring to as acceleration
is so again i just want to say
emphatically i'm not saying that we
don't have problems and that's all
delusion i'm just saying we've always
had problems and in fact those problems
have been horrendous so much worse and
these problems are just getting
they're getting more
um
solvable like it feels like we're
getting closer and closer to things
being better and so it's odd to me that
as things are getting better the
narrative the internal feeling is no no
it's accelerating it's way worse like
this is madness we're 90 seconds we're
closer to annihilation than we were
uh during the cuban missile crisis right
and so i'm just like this feels like a
narrative problem this does not feel
like a reality problem
well well i mean
i i would i would sort of agree and then
also flip it and agree with the opposite
which you could also say no it's a
reality problem
right because we're actually entering
because of the narrative like people are
reacting the way they're reacting and
therefore it doesn't matter if it's
narrative it just is happening well
because the reality is that we are we
are caught at the intersection of the
ark of coming alive which is always the
happily ever after
anyone grow up to be president or an
astronaut what's my hashtag best life
who's my soulmate twinflame what's my
wonderful entrepreneurial experience
where do i want to go what do i want to
travel what do i want to see and who and
be
that coming alive right basically the
sort of
the gift we were collectively given
between 1945 and say 2008 you know which
was just yay upwards onwards right
versus the staying alive arc
right which is triage it's like wait a
second maybe i don't have the time the
money the resources maybe you know what
we've seen with real estate prices in
all rural rural new york everyone's
getting the hell out of manhattan all
the mountain towns in colorado i'll pay
triple your asking price let me get the
out of la right all these things
we're starting to see people move
because they're getting a sense that the
music's about to stop and do they have a
chair they actually want to be caught
sitting in
right and that coming alive and staying
alive arc is crazy making it is
exponentially complex and so our
narrative what most people do is they
can't hold both
so they just pick one
right and if you just pick it's all
staying alive then you end up a paranoid
prepper in northern idaho eating canned
food out of your basement
right playing red dawn you know and if
you just go to the pollyanna staying
alive or coming alive then you off
to a beach retreat in costa rica you
know and do yoga and ketamine until the
wheels fall off right and so right and
so like these are the challenges the
question is is can we the narrative
challenge i would propose is actually
can we acknowledge that both are true
it's an incredibly complex quadratic
equation we don't know how it's going to
turn out our participation in it plays a
big part in how it turns out so we need
to be vigilant and subtle
and adaptive and responsive
all at once
that strikes me as a big ask my friend
well to your point about globalism
you're like i don't think we're going to
get there i agree
i agree i think actually if you kind of
feel what's happening in society right
now
my sense is is like you know back to the
pax americana like the american peace
that was 1945 we kind of won the war we
nipped in nipped out kind of took the
took the gold ring but took none of the
hits so like not only was japan you know
atomized but europe good guys and bad
guys was bombed into ruin and then we
set up bretton woods we set up the world
bank and the imf and we ran the table
and we funded everybody and we built the
world we came to dominate
right now that is is you know that
included the 1960s and the counter
culture that included the personal
growth explosion new age the
introduction of psychedelics the
introduction of you know gestalt
workshops and landmark and all the
things right
so you're kind of like man if we didn't
get to like that was a pretty damn lucky
little bubble in history you know half
century of and you have unprecedented
prosperity stability and opportunity
if we didn't figure out how to become
bodhisattvas
um i don't think we're going to suddenly
stop figuring it out now
so that was our crack at it and we can
be absolutely grateful to it but i think
it's in the rearview mirror so the
question to me is more like well what's
healthy tribalism
because if you see the impulse in like
like
christian nationalists white
identitarians that kind of thing right
um and it's and it's even got weird
echoes in
putin's russia which is kind of part of
the reason and how like steve bannon's
of the world and all these things you're
like wait russia was what's the bad guys
how'd they suddenly become our friends
and what's that going on about and it's
a very masculine white anti-homosexual
like pro-christian kind of thing you're
like wow that's a strong strong urge
to belong
and to be part of something and to be
part of a group
and you can see that on the far left as
well you can see all these movements
where people are like screw it
we can't figure this out now those are
unhealthy tribes
right because they're based on race
they're based on identity they're often
strongly othering the other but what if
we actually said well what's the health
what's healthy tribalism
and healthy tribalism is community
healthy tribalism is rooted in place
healthy tribalism is like we you know
this is our these are our neighbors
this is our watershed
this is the place where we get by and
when and when communities rally in fires
or droughts or floods and various things
you see it
but you're like those those ties have
been getting weaker and weaker i mean
vivek murthy the former u.s surgeon
general just wrote a book about this and
i think it's called together and it's
and it's just this idea of how
fragmented isolated alienated and alone
we are and obviously quarantine is just
you know 10x that
but so what is healthy tribalism i think
it it get it's like re-stitched together
community bonds
because like brock long who's the head
the head of fema
i mean last year he's like yeah folks um
you know you need to really like
americans you need to stop thinking of
fema in the federal emergency management
association as 9-1-1
yeah not it
right we don't have the skills we don't
have the people we don't have the
resources like you're on your own
when goes really upside down so i
think actually fostering
healthy regression or regression to
healthy tribes
rooted in place rooted in community that
are self-sufficient and can look after
themselves and each other and including
the the most needy uh and least least
privileged folks within that community
that feels like a really important move
for us to start making
okay so let's start um
figuring out how we do that through the
lens of the book so
you've got this need for people to
broaden out their sense of um connection
of their sense of tribe
you go into great detail in the book
about
what you call ethical cults
and i'd love for you to walk people
through i thought this was really
interesting that all cults basically
have these i think it was four
things in common um
and then sort of differentiating between
you know a cult and then an ethical cult
and how that feeds into this notion of
community
yeah so and when you were saying the
four things were you thinking of the
rapture ideologies or were you thinking
of the three oh you're right the four
were rapture ideologies but you do
tie in um
you go through a list of things that
like
are the signifiers of a cult like
basically hey if any of these things are
true and you go through a bunch of them
oh yeah yeah but you're right i was
melding to two ideas there sorry about
that
no worries um so yeah i mean just this
this idea of you know so so the middle
the first part of the book which is kind
of what we've been discussing right now
is is playfully titled choose your own
apocalypse right because the idea there
is like who knows so it's on each of us
to come to our own provisional decisions
about what we think is coming what we
think is happening next and therefore
what should we do about it
the middle section of the book is called
the alchemist cookbook and that's saying
hey how do we
build for ourselves the things that used
to be the the toolkit of religion and so
how do we
you know find inspiration reliably
because otherwise life's a and
then we die how do we heal our trauma
because we take a bunch of hits in this
world and otherwise we all end up with
ptsd and how do we connect to each other
and so the third part of the book that
tom you just talked about is ethical
culprit which is saying okay
the world's going off the rails part one
there's nowhere to go we have to figure
this out
right two
here's how we have peak experiences and
deep healing
oh but like yay wouldn't that be enough
no it's not because every time you have
ecstatic experiences and cathartic
experiences in community you tend to end
up with culty communities right so
that's that's why part three is all
about like how do we put this into gear
and into culture
without putting it in the same ditch
that it keeps getting put in right by
cultic practices and so what's
interesting is that the you know in my
background my my academic background is
as an anthropologist who did a lot of
kind of comparative religious studies
and that kind of thing and so within
academia
you use the word cult very differently
because it simply means a mystery school
or practice outside state sanction right
so
dionysus had a cult kali had a cult
right the listening mysteries were
called even early christianity before
the roman emperor constantine made it
the state religion was a cult
and the latin term is cultis and that
just means to worship
so you're like oh okay so a traditional
cult just was a group of people
worshiping together
right and and david foster wallace the
writer you know he wrote that i mean he
he gave that really famous graduation
speech
called this is water
right right so good and he and in that
he has one of one of his more memorable
lines he's like everybody worships the
only question is what
right and you've got to be really
careful what you pick to worship because
anything other than something divine and
sublime
right is going to eat you alive
so the differentiation between different
types of cults traditional cults you
subjugated yourself you said okay i'm
going to bow down and i'm going to
follow the instructions it was
subjugation of self to the lineage there
may have been a priest there may have
been an officiant but they were one in a
long line and they kind of answered
to tradition and they answered to elders
right so it was relatively stable and
relatively safe
in the you know let's say 1950s through
70s and then kind of you know forever
onwards we then had a lot of gurus
breaking with their lineages
and they said i'm a new covenant i'm a
clean slate never mind any of that
that came before me you subjugate to me
a higher self
but there's no ballast there's no
lineage there's no tradition there's no
elders anymore and that obviously became
super problematic and that's how we got
drinking the kool-aid with jim jones
that's how we got charlie manson it's
also how we get you know weak versions
like nexium and heaven's gate
so i think this is actually a really
important part of your thesis i'd love
for you to explain
so what this what this seems to bring
together for me is the idea that hey i
get that you want to tear down the
current structures because they're not
delivering all that they could
but it becomes problematic when you
don't have checks and balances and the
sort of um one of the ideas that that
has come out of 2020 for me is this idea
of
the real magic is in the friction
between uh liberals and conservatives
that you actually need both and that the
human impulse you can sort of divide
people into do you lean a little more
towards one way or the other forgetting
the extremes just do you lean more
towards like empathy and hey we need to
take care of everybody or do you lean a
little towards yes but we also need to
take personal responsibility and that
you don't want either one of those
things to run rampant because they
become um evolutionary problems is
probably the easiest way to think of it
meaning if you only have um empathy as
your driving thing we never go anywhere
because no one's ever striving and you
get people that take advantage of that
that sort of drag the society down and
on the other hand if you never think
about other people and it's just sort of
individualistic and take care of
yourself you can see how the society
doesn't really ever form so it's it's in
this sort of ebb and flow the back and
forth friction between the two so
is it
so go ahead
i just said hundred percent like exactly
that
yeah that to me is what i see lurking in
what you're saying now is that okay if
you have a cult or uh you make a joke in
the book i forget who said it but the
only difference between a cult and a
religion is how much real estate they
own that's really good
that's a great quote um and
this idea of okay when you become the
new lineage as the cult leader now
there's no checks and balances you're
removing yourself from that
the the
flock the group the tribe whatever we're
gonna call them from saying hey that's
not how we've done it in the past and so
now as you
uh you know break
so far free of that that you're not
anchored to anything then you can drift
into the madness of you know the
kool-aid and helter skelter and all that
stuff um
but also you can see how if you remain
stuck that that will also calcify so
it's like you need that you need some
like departure from the past without
that clean break is that is that a a
good read on what you're talking about
well for sure i mean i think we
obviously have to be i mean there's sort
of you know ecclesiastes like there's
nothing new under the sun right so like
all we're ever doing is reinventing and
repurposing and stitching stuff together
that is you know what what is old is new
again kind of thing so you know huge hat
tip to the past and we forever have to
re-recreate so that it feels fresh and
relevant and timely and helpful for us
um
there's there's a there's several issues
because the thing that
in a lot of like cult exposes
documentaries etc
um
there's there's almost always the
situation of like but how did but such a
bunch of smart young clever talented
people fall for such a thing right and
whether that's movie stars or heiresses
or you know homecoming queens or varsity
quarterbacks and you know that's true
you know via from nexium all the way
back to the manson family
and and and on the heels of that is
almost always like oh guru with feet of
clay huckster shyster was really oni in
it for the power the sex the money the
whatever
and that is true for a whole bunch of
low to mid-level cults but the ones that
i couldn't solve for i was like well
wait what's going on here were the ones
who actually were early
badasses
right adepts they had kids
examples
so adidas would be one osho would be
another there's a i mean that there's a
trunk would be another like they were
legit none of these people i feel very
very uneducated right now
no it's okay so so chogyam trungpa was a
tibetan scholar he he came to the west
he was schooled at oxford he then came
to america he started the naropa
institute in boulder and he was one of
the major bringers of tibetan dharma to
the west
right and was badass he's the one who
coined the term spiritual materialism he
had all sorts of cool insights but the
community he also died at i think like
46 of cirrhosis of the liver because he
was drinking so much because you take
somebody out of a monastic tradition in
the east and you're suddenly like in the
west and that was a corrupting influence
osho came up through
the the the indian experience and kind
of continued to leave that behind and
then he came to this country um adidas
was actually a a westerner he was he
grew up in queens i think and then came
to california
super duper smart and everybody like
there's still shock waves from adidas
lineage people who were close to him and
got
tons you know lit up by him that are now
second and third generation
teachers but he also got bent
so my inquiry was always like well wait
what's happening with those guys not
like the keith renery twits right that
guy's just a multi-level
marketer with a little bolt on a
landmark you know and you know you know
and a bit of a horn dog to scratch right
so not those guys but actual
transmitters realizers
and how do they get bent and and i think
that the one of the first things is they
grab the ring of power
right and that's there's that sense
because there is something that happens
in sort of tribal primates right when
one person
gets sufficiently advanced to boot up
and then light up others
what happens and and
almost always right there's those
four basic
feelings that we have and this work
comes from lisa feldman barrett who has
she's a she wrote she's actually one of
the top 100 most cited scientists in the
world
um she has appointments at northeastern
university and at harvard med school and
she wrote a kick-ass book called how
emotions are made and she's like she's
like all that theory of constructive
emotions and you can monitor micro
muscles in the face and tell people what
the things you're like that's actually
way more cultural than you'd think but
at our root is interception like what do
we feel in our guts
and she's like it's only four things
it's just a quadrant it's like am i
feeling positive or negative and am i
feeling active about that or passive
about that
right so active positive is joyful you
know active passive is content
right
negative negative active
is rage and negative passive is
depression
right so that's that's just kind of it
and then we assign emotional labels and
we assign
plot and characters and who's to praise
or blame for the way i feel right now
right we do all the transactional
analysis games people play kind of
but at our root it's one of four things
and so when we experience an avatar
right a human who has really stepped up
above and beyond
we tend to have one of four feelings we
want to if you know the first one is
active passive like oh my gosh they're
amazing they're so beautiful i want to
follow them
right and then if you get really lit up
with the holy ghost feeling right then
you're like i actually want to merge
with them i really want i want to i want
to actually them right you and then
they could be it can be heterosexual
homosexual erotic it can be confused
because like i've never felt this much
ever outside of physical attraction so i
get my wires crossed and you know in the
greek terms it's eros and agape right
agape is kind of spiritual love and
errors is obviously erotic love and
sometimes if i've never felt agape
before i get i probably confuse it the
only tag i have in my body brain is this
must mean love and passion and you see
this even in evangelical mega churches
there's all kinds of fornicating that
goes on right people cannot keep the
holy ghost feeling under wraps right so
so the first one is to follow him the
next one is to him but then if it
all gets too much
right and suddenly i feel like i'm i'm
in deep water or i have friends or
family they're like you've just joined a
cult or you've lost your mind or you
know you're then i start to fear them
and that could even have been with a
good person that that avatar could have
been like hey i'm going to help you let
go of things i'm going to help you let
go of your ego and your ego is going to
say may day may day red alert this is a
this is a survival situation so you fear
them
and then the final one is if either you
have the capacity yourself or you get
into a crowd and this you know cancel
culture is a micro version of this which
is you then want to fight him you want
to take him down and this is the
pitchforks the torches and and the
crucifixes
right which is we have to eradicate this
person because their very existence
actually threatens our worldview
so so those are the four you know follow
fear and fight that most humans
most times that's our response
to one of these exceptional humans right
so the question is is what's in the
middle of all that to your point about
it's both like you know liberal
conservative all those things what's at
the center and that's can we feel it
can we actually when someone hits the
gong and we're like oh i resonate with
that that's true for me too
can we feel it
and can we step up and own our own power
and that's really hard and we tend not
to want to do it we almost almost would
so much rather just collapse into a
family dynamic that's a mother or a
father i get to follow them and and
steven uh we're actually robert johnson
i think that's right i think it's robert
johnson the jungian psychologist um
coined a phrase which i think is
beautiful he calls it the golden shadow
and the golden shadow people are
probably familiar with like shadow
shadow in psychological work which is
like the things i disowned about myself
right that guy's an angry i'm
not you know that kind of thing right
but the golden shadow is the exact
opposite the golden shadow is the things
that are that is our own capacities our
own strengths our own greatness that we
deny for ourselves and then we project
onto a guru
so i'm not that spiritual but they are
i'm not that awakened but they are i'm
not that insightful but they are and the
challenge for the guru and this gets
back to the grabbing the ring of power
right is if they actually accept that
gold so everyone comes and they bestow
their gold onto the neck of the guru and
the guru's like are you not entertained
right
and and then but over time that gold
drops them to their knees no one is that
strong
and it takes their community with them
yeah that is uh
that that goes back to this idea of okay
how do we get
to this global ideal where we're taking
everybody into consideration when you
have and this is my favorite part of the
lord of the rings trilogy is when
unfortunately i don't know lord of the
rings very well but the kate blanchette
elf character takes the ring turns into
like the beast and then she's like ah
and i can give it back and for her that
was like the test to feel
just how powerful she could get
and then to hand the power back over the
funny thing is that that is a very good
analogy to being a ceo
so
when i i fought so hard to rise up when
i was first an employee and just working
my way up to really becoming an
entrepreneur i fought so hard to get to
the top and then when i got to the top i
realized oh my god this is all going to
implode unless i can give away that
power and make sure that everybody feels
that they can challenge me that they
don't need to give me any deference
because of my position
and and that really came from like a
super selfish place of recognizing i
just wasn't talented enough or smart
enough to solve all the problems by
myself and i had to find a way to get
the best out of everybody else and the
only literally the only solution out of
desperation i don't expect anybody to
think that i'm clever for this just out
of desperation was like i have to
not in any way shape or form
make them cow before me like i have to
go way out of my way to make them feel
safe and that they can speak up and if i
do something that's dumb that they can
just say that's dumb that they don't
have to worry about hurting my feelings
and again just because knowing that if
i'm going to get where i want to go
i have to give that away and so when i
think about a that's hard right because
it's rad to be in charge it is rad to be
at the head of the company i'm not gonna
lie right like it's amazing if you can
deal with you have to be the one to make
the decisions
because that can stress people the
out there is no going home when you're
the ceo you're thinking about it 24 7.
but if you can deal with that part of it
it's really quite
amazing
so how do we get
like now we're beginning to recognize it
we see everybody handing you the gold is
going to be a real problem
we'll go more into the weeds probably
right after this about the um
the
lisa feldman barrett notion of look
you're just feeling in your body
and until you have awareness and control
over that like you're or tell yourself a
better narrative it's probably a better
way to think about it about what you're
feeling you're going to be trapped
forever and and the um the deep
element in the book that you have it's
the only thing where in the book sex
part one and part two nothing else gets
a part one and part two so sort of
telling you how powerful this is is a
way to um
sync back up maybe with something more
elemental and profound but again we'll
set that aside so
how then
knowing the difficulties that human
beings will have to
give the ring back
how do we
move forward
such a beautiful question
right and i mean and i think you know
the whole premise of the book for folks
that are kind of
familiar with either technology or
cryptocurrencies you can kind of the
analogies are the same
i think our intention is to say hey any
single solution
is either going to just be instantly out
of date the moment you know the world is
unfolding faster than our plans um or
that all top down solutions end up
fascist and totalitarian over time or
just bad and not quite right so like if
you're if um
boris yeltsin like famously
came to the united states to check out
the houston space center and then he had
a day off and he had his handle and
she's like i want to go see the real
americas they dropped him off at a
randall's grocery store which is kind of
one of the chains in texas and he was
just gobsmacked he's like are you
kidding me like there's all
these open freezer bays with you know tv
dinners there's pudding pops there's
like what he's like even even um our
polar bureau doesn't get access to this
if anybody in moscow saw this there
would be revolution in the streets and
he basically went home completely
crestfallen forgot all about nasa and
was like that grocery store man and he
was like how did it happen and what it
was was you know it was the invisible
hand of the free market right it was a
thousand autonomous decisions operating
seamlessly all at once to produce you
know grocery store greatness
and
you know bill gates has been getting you
know taken through the ring out in the
last year or so especially around
vaccines but actually one of his other
projects at the gates foundation is an
even i think simpler clearer example of
the problem of tops-down answers no
matter how well-intentioned right so a
bunch of smart people at the gates
foundation they crunched all the numbers
they're like we got millions and
millions of dollars how do we save the
world do the best thing they're like
okay malaria kills the most people
anywhere and wouldn't you know it people
get bitten at night and so 10 bucks you
know spend 10 bucks buy a mosquito net
save a life that's it we're going to go
do that and they did it in africa and
they did it in around lake tanganyika
and what was so they pumped all the
money they distributed all the nets and
then they came back a few years later
and they realized oh my god
no one's using them to sleep with this
is a food scarce area on the edge of a
lake 87 percent of the mosquito nets
were being used to catch fish and
further deplete the fishery because
people were starving and hungry
and it wasn't that the gates foundation
was nefarious or stupid they were well
intentioned and well informed but what
happened the folks representing all the
clinics in africa were like you look
they're trying to they're trying to do
tech bro solutions to complex problems
of rural indigenous poverty and it's a
wicked problem and so anything you
optimize for especially from
headquarters far away is almost always
going to be wrong by the time it gets
there it's the same with big military
supply chains versus special operations
guys in the field you know it shows up
all over
so the question is before you move on
from that the um that ties directly for
anybody sort of that hasn't heard the
boris yeltsin grocery store story it
ties directly if i remember right one of
the most famous quotes from that is him
saying
but who makes the decision on how many
whatever blocks of cheese to order
people like what do you mean who makes
the decision it's like every grocery
store makes a decision for themselves
based on demand and but like
in a country where everything had to run
through the bureaucracy that was he
didn't even contemplate that you would
just give the power over essentially to
the market um so
that idea of the sort of decentralized
decision making
um
and now i'm curious to see where you're
going so i just wanted to draw that that
connection for people
yeah i think it's just it's so tempting
and right we don't have a a stalinist
communist tops down bureaucracy but we
do have like philanthropic capitalism
like oh jeff bezos or bill gates or elon
musk or some other smart super loaded
dude is going to fix it for us like an
iron man fantasy and it's like no no no
not no one's that smart no one beats our
collective
intelligence so you could think of this
entire book as basically a an open
source toolkit that is the
cultural equivalent of blockchain or
linux right i mean most of silicon
valley runs on linux it's an open source
code and people because this will
ultimately boil down to the individual
it will boil down to the community at a
bare ass minimum
right and that's what i mean about sort
of like you know and in the state of the
world you can think of those old bumper
stickers you might see on whole foods
parking lots on subarus or you know
priuses which was like think globally
act locally
and i think maybe an update for that
these days is grieve globally
right like actually open our hearts to
the wound of the world right now and and
everyone and everything on it but thrive
locally
right rally your people come up with
solutions that work where you are with
what you have and what you face
and so the toolkit is not a singular
tops down solution it's here's the lego
blocks here's a few examples you can
build a castle or a boat or a tow truck
right and now we have the the building
blocks of culture architecture let a
thousand let a million experiments
happen
you know most are going to fail
but if but but a bunch are going to
catch and when they catch people will
look over and be like hey what's that
they're doing can i borrow it can i see
can we can we try ours
and that's how we unlock
human spirit human initiative
right to actually create enough novelty
and enough solutions to help as fast as
possible as many people as possible with
as much fun as possible because we are
wired to create we got opposable thumbs
and prefrontal cortexes and novelties
fun
yeah all right are you familiar with the
kulaks from
russia yeah
okay so i hear you say that and i want
it to be true and if i hadn't read um
the gulag archipelago then i i might be
like oh my god yes this is it
uh but
so yes
in some circumstances the soil is such
that when people see other people
thriving they're like oh my god teach me
what you're doing so i can do it myself
but there are also times where people
look at that and go why is he doing
better than me or why is she doing
better than me and that's unfair and
they've got
some undeserved advantage over me
and now i just want to tear them down
which of course is what happened i think
it was in the ukraine where they you
have this class of successful farmers
and there were all these posters put up
everywhere um
saying like that the you know the kulaks
are basically
uh the reason you have nothing is
because they have too much
and so they literally rounded them up
and killed them took their land and what
ended up happening was a famine of
untold proportions in the most fertile
land on the planet
and so
i wish i want to believe because i am
fundamentally so deeply optimistic i am
startled by the estimation that people
think that we're 90 seconds i i i edge
up to pollyanna in my like belief in
people and oh my god everybody's
wonderful and they'll all like get it
but then i also look at history and i
see something like the kulaks how do we
avoid
the human propensity
for active
negative feelings playing themselves out
in the form of rage and tearing down
um somebody who has more than me because
it feels unfair
yeah dude i mean i think that's super
true and potential i mean mugabe and
zimbabwe right did the same thing and
and you know like did a lot of
repatriation and and turfed out um a lot
of the
white colonists and farmers you know
from rhodesia uh and then there was just
kind of a decimation of the
infrastructure and the fertility and the
abundance of that
that country um even in the japanese
internment in the us during world war ii
we used to go kite surfing in this
awesome town called hood river in oregon
and mount hood is this beautiful snow
cap volcano and it's got all the cherry
blossoms and orchards and the japanese
coming from mount fuji coming from those
other places had made amazing farms boom
they all get yanked out right thrown
into internment camps their land taken
over by jealous competitive neighbors
right and so you we we do see that
and i think that all goes back down to
the finite game versus the infinite game
right because because we are hardwired
for tribalism
right everybody thinks of something like
oxytocin as the cuddled you know the
cuddle drug or the love hormone or the
trust hormone but it's also the
ethnocentric curb stomp your neighbor
hormone it bonds from mother to child
and love her to love her but it also
bonds us against a whole new way to
think about that yeah no absolutely it
is a moral molecule that is a bonding
device and in fact when people go to
political rallies or
or soccer stadiums right you get soccer
hooligans like what's that all about
what it's all about is that you get
juiced on oxytocin being around your
people
and then your ability to over other the
other goes through the roof so basically
we regress under stress that's not a
surprise so you know sort of after
tribalism
right tribalism is destiny and humanism
is optional
so we have to choose this we have to
choose the better angels of our nature
they don't show up by default or by
accident and that is why in the past it
has taken a lincoln it has taken a
gandhi a mandela a king it has taken
somebody to hold the higher frequency
and say hey folks i know we could
collapse into rage here
i know we could seek the path of
vengeance that way doesn't work here's
the higher clearer signal
and nancy keene at harvard business
school she wrote a rad book called
forged in crisis and she took a look at
ernest shackleton abraham lincoln
dietrich von bonhoeffer the the pastor
who tried to assassinate hitler rachel
carson who founded the environmental
movement with silent spring and
frederick douglass the abolitionist and
the most amazing thing i mean there's
just i'll just tell one story i mean
people are loosely familiar with shackle
and total show pulls it off anyway
but the emancipation proclamation like
good old abe lincoln we're like yes and
i write this to free the slaves and yay
ta-da right no he was at his wit's end
he had no goddamn idea it was a
desperation hail mary that he had no
idea would do anything or work at all
and he was out of ideas
and to like steer it to that point
right that oh my gosh even our heroes
were human
it was confused it was in no way a layup
and it was no way a sure thing and they
had to choose the right thing
and do it anyway and those little tiny
choice points right scattered through
history through people we know and
people will never know
that on that has turned the tide of
history like my my dear friend uh is a
former uh commander for seal team six
and specifically gold and black squadron
right and he was put into yemen to track
one of
the gnarlier terrorists and was on you
know hunting him for two years and they
went rolling in to this night up and
their v it was a total it was a you know
not a comedy of errors but it's sort of
a show that night and their vehicle
got high-sided and they suddenly they're
getting they're getting intel from the
overhead support planes there's like
there's six vehicles approaching from
the town they're like they're splitting
up they're starting to stagger they're
doing leapfrog approaches like these
guys were trained militias they knew
exactly how to minimize their exposure
they had four seals and then a bunch of
natives locals right and and and and and
his and his and they could see them on
night vision it's like t-minus like you
know 30 seconds 20 seconds approaching
like what's happening here's his buddy
flip off his safety and he's got you
know he's got his goggles and he's got
his night vision and he's about to open
fire
and he was like look i know if this
turns into a fire fight we can we can
take care of these guys but we can't
take care of the next three waves that
come
in support so this is our death sentence
like if you pull that trigger it's the
beginning of the end
and
he just said he had this feeling and he
just put his hand on his buddy's
shoulder and he said just he says just
just hold just hold for a second
and then out of the darkness there's
this
and then then from one of these guys but
turns out they're cousins
they come to find each other they hug
they share a cigarette
right and everybody goes home alive and
on their way that night
and so that story is was he was like
yeah you have to leave space for grace
and that to me is is like because if you
know i mean i hang out with some way
crazy smart folks that like make me feel
like usa today like i'm like comic books
and pretty pictures and captions you
know and i'm like holy smokes i have to
like completely empty my brain just to
keep up with them
and they run
game theory analysis and they run all
the complex things and and none of them
pencil out they don't like you would
just like slit your wrist if you just
listen to these data sets and you're
like okay i just give up i give up it's
all pointless right and yet
all right and yet there's that there's
that missing piece like somehow we
muddle through
if we can leave enough space for grace
and grace comes through
a human who is grounded centered
courageous fearless
right and willing to do what they must
at the moment they must
and that's what nancy keane said she
says when
lincoln did that when
bonhoeffer when all of these heroes have
done the thing
mostly anonymous often alone right it
sends shockwaves through the world
right and that's our force multiplier
right like that's the sort of ace in the
hole of heartache because we could just
collapse we could just break with the
burden and of of the awareness of all
the things right now
you know but if we can just be like okay
not my will but thy will and when the
moment comes i'm here to play my part
like that
can change the world so now how do we do
that how do we
look at the evolutionary biological
drives that we have to turn that into a
tool kit to
architect culture in a way that allows
us to escape
move the clock backwards away from
midnight and
thrive into the future
yeah beautiful i mean what what
what a wonderful softball down the
middle there that is just fantastic um
i mean my sense is is is that we need to
get
more effective and more deliberate and
more inclusive
about our access to
healing inspiration and connection
right we understand the neurophysiology
of those things we can dive into the
kind of the mechanisms like you know
breathing and embodiment and sexuality
and sync you know sacred substance use
and music and we can use these things to
do to do all three
right because you know we can because
you know life's a and then we die
and that's hard and we take a
bunch of hits so we have to have ways to
defrost defrag our nervous systems
digest our grief right and kind of
reboot after all the pain and suffering
so healing is essential otherwise we
just get gunged up and then we are just
rage monsters and we can't see or think
straight
but we also have to have the capacity to
have
peak states because life is you know the
burden of life is hard like you know
ernest becker you know the denial of
death you know like we were born we were
born to you know comprehend the stars
and we sort of you know you know only to
know we're going to die and rot dumbly
you know in the dirt like how the hell
do you handle that well you handle it
by having access to peak states where
like ah yes this is all
this is wonder right this is access to
the sublime this is inspiration i
remember i remember this so that's what
that you know we set down our burdens we
stand tall even for a moment we can pick
them we can pick our packs back up again
right
and then connection because we're we're
tribal social primates and we need each
other
so that can deal
that can deal with both
our you know day-to-day
micro ptsd
but it can also deal with
our deeper wounds you know the hits that
we've taken like adverse childhood
events adverse life events we can
actually
work lose some of that scar tissue
and then we can do it together and
robin dunbar
the
oxford anthropologist who's most folks
are familiar with him from the dunbar
number which is like you can you know
beyond 150 people it's kind of hard to
keep things together
um
he did a study of the son bushmen in the
kalahari
and they engage in trance dancing right
so they get together and they throw down
right and he and he noticed something
interesting he's like he's like oh um
rather than during hard times they don't
have time for recreation and silly
things during hard times they have even
more trans dances because they use them
as a way to discharge their collective
frictions and tensions
right so instead of like when mandela
right coming out of south african
apartheid he set up the truth and
reconciliation committees like hey we're
again he didn't just say hey whitey
you know you afrikaan afrikaner
right you guys had your time now it's
ours and we're going to put the boot to
you
he didn't even dismantle the springbucks
rugby stadium for anybody that's seen
the film invictus right that's a that's
a key part he's like he said he saw the
finite game of apartheid he even saw the
finite game of afrikaner rugby and he
popped that up to the infinite game
he's like oh this is symbolic
right this is about rainbow nation this
is about all of us and and that
unlocking
of what gandhi called satyagraha what
mlk called soul force like mandela had
it and that's what transformed that
moment can you define soul force you
define in the book it um
it sounded silly to me until you walked
through sort of the roots of it and then
i was like whoa this is actually quite a
powerful notion
it's crazy powerful and and just to
finish that right so so instead of the
truth and reconciliation committee you
know you go back to the bushmen doing
their tron stances how do we create the
groove and reconciliation committee
right how do we actually have ecstatic
celebratory communal events that wipe
our collective etch-a-sketch
now and we we walk out on and on with
our brothers and sisters now that's not
always true and there are certain
interpersonal things that are going to
require true sit downs but there's just
a lot of friction and tension that just
accumulates in social situations that we
don't have time
we need batch forgiveness
for ourselves and for each other
right and so grooving reconciliation
committees i think canon should be a
thing i mean think about a flash mob
where you actually got together and
everybody got their yayas out and
everybody felt reset
like we need these in the local level we
need these at the macro level
so
so that notion of soul force is actually
it's a beautiful story and i didn't even
know the whole the whole part until
doing the research for the book
um
but it actually came
from um
howard thurman was an african-american
mystic in the early 20th century and he
was one of the key inspirations
for martin luther king and all the
others in the black civil rights
movement in fact he wrote a book called
jesus and the dispossessed which like
dozens of those dudes carried around
with them every single day like in their
in their briefcases
and in 1935 he was the first
african-american interfaith ambassador
to go to india and he met with gandhi
and gandhi was sharing his emerging
philosophy of peaceful nonvi you know
peaceful non-violence and he shared the
concept of satyagraha which basically
meant truth force
means when you're so aligned with with
the infinite game basically then you're
immovable
and then there is no fight there is no
struggle all you're doing is testifying
all you're doing is being a human
bearing witness to that
integral truth
and so thumb and went back to the states
and
he wasn't a big talker actually he was
very interesting he was like he he he
spoke and transmitted but it was this
like deep baritone it wasn't like
southern baptist preacher like kind of
rhyming and bopping and kind of carrying
people along on a flow he had like huge
silences and you would just baritone
like transmit you know
like the lorax and
and he was like okay sachi graha that's
a mouthful but let's call it sulfurs
and he gathered all of the
the young leaders at that time um uh of
the civil rights movement he's like this
is the thing
and before that um peaceful non-violence
like non-violent protest had been a
tactic it wasn't a strategy so the civil
rights protesters were like well we're
not going to piss off
a bunch of cops with german shepherds
billy clubs and cannons right we'll get
our heads busted and then sometimes they
did anyway right but we're not going to
do it that was it was tactical right we
will live to protest another day after
thurman introduced the concept of soul
force it became the central guiding
philosophy
right and it was the philosophy that
king attempted to manage right and the
black panthers would come and they'd be
like nah this this is too slow this
we need to fight back there was all
kinds of power struggles and differences
of opinion
but soul force carried the day and then
with the impact and selma the impact in
you know
the i have a dream speech right when we
can meet physical force with soul force
right then we can change the world and
it did
right and so erica chenoweth that um
harvard kennedy school of government did
a famous study where
she was looking at that non-violent
protest around the world and she and she
studied i think like 19 different
historical examples
and
ran you know did the did the math and
concluded that it takes three and a half
percent
of a population that's it just three and
a half percent of the people in
non-violent testimony to sole force to
change
society
and now you know there are definitely
critiques of that like how applicable is
that for today you know because it's one
thing to be like hey
i'm going to sit at the lunch counter
and ask to be fed or i'm going to sit in
the front of the bus and the bus has
been well maintained and has gas in the
tank it's going to get to its
destination is running on schedule it's
another thing like when that bus is like
huddling off a cliff and you've got to
figure out how to change that thing into
a chitty chitty bang bang you know
before it crashes right so so where are
we now don't know is three and a half
percent died in the wool and gonna work
every time probably not are we there yet
absolutely not so how about we just like
put a pin in that map and go for three
and a half percent as fast as possible
and then we can just have a snack break
and we can look around and say okay
humans how does it look from here
okay so
now i think this is going to tie in
perfectly to where you're at but why
spend so much time in the book talking
about sex
in my right to assume that it's
described mostly as a vehicle to
[Music]
get in touch with um
to to generate an awakening of sorts
well i mean the only reason it's got two
chapters is because you just have to
snip all the wires to the bomb because
sexuality has so many loaded taboos
around it
but like sex makes an appearance in the
subhead of your book
what is it about sort of the the end of
the world uh you know in a world where
we've gone mad
what what is the role that sex plays and
maybe we should broaden it out because
you talk about the four or five things
um that you list and sex drugs and rock
and roll under different names but those
three make an appearance in this um
i'm curious i'm not sure how to
what what umbrella to put it under what
shell to put it in like
to me there is this um would you call it
the things that lead to an ecstatic
experience like
what what are those i would say sort of
the big five evolutionary drivers
right and so if we're thinking like so
you think of music as one of the big
five evolutionary drivers
absolutely interesting absolutely right
and and daniel levitan uh at mcgill in
canada has written a book called this is
your brain on music and makes all sorts
of fascinating points but not the least
of which is that music quite likely
predated language
so it would just give us
uh respiration
embodiment
sexual embodiment what do you mean by
that well i mean
there's a thousand ways to describe that
but some of it is lisa feldman the
entire the notion of like how our bodies
and brains are functioning affects our
hearts and minds got it right at a
simplest level and then at more
complicated levels like what are some of
the mechanisms of how we process pain
and pleasure what are some of the
interior strongest systems and i took a
deep dive into both the vagal nerve as
well as the endocannabinoid system both
of which do amazing things to like
regulate our organs and our blood
pressure and our digestion and our
inflammation and our healing and our
responses so like how do we actually
understand how us as organisms work
and can we use that understanding to
actually trigger
healing in peak states together right so
you put all you put all of the you put
those five things together
and they can reliably
deliver everything from
micro ptsd
resets
to ptsd
deep healing and integration all the way
to
i mean if you really take you know all
the way to peak states and ecstatic
states and inspiration all the way to an
actual
death rebirth practice
and if you look across all societies you
know indigenous traditional greek
classical you name it right they've all
had death rebirth practices give me an
example well the lucinian mysteries are
one right i mean
so so that was the one that was that was
the one i started uh stealing fire with
the idea of like stealing the kaike on
like like socrates is you know you know
bad boy student and then he threw a
house party with it right and the id the
listening mysteries were this
nine-day initiatory mystic death rebirth
cult and they used ferment potentially
fermented ergot which had lsa which was
a precursor to lsd so it was this deep
dive initiation and and plato said it he
said you know the mysteries don't just
teach us how to die a better death they
teach us how to live a better life early
christianity our buddy brian murray
rescue who wrote the immortality key
recently
he drew a connection between the ancient
greek mysteries and the early christian
you're like oh my gosh the other
christians were psychedelic what an
interesting hypothesis right and you see
this with shamanic initiations you see
this all over the world
which in goethe right the the
philosopher said he said he
who does not know the secret
die and become
remains forever a stranger on this earth
so
for all of human history these have been
pervasive they've been central to
culture religion philosophy and
they've absolutely all tied to
psychedelics
no no no and this is what i mean that's
why there's five not one right um
there's there's lots of different ways
in and and fasting and sleep deprivation
and pain like privation whether that's
flogging or being hung up on trees or
you know or being suspended by your
flesh like the lakota sundance there's
all sorts of ways to override a human
nervous system
right and create a deep system reboot
but now
right we have the science we have the
neuroscience we have the psychology we
also have the comparative anthropology
to be able to look at and be like okay
that's been happening all over the place
there's definitely there there what's
happening and now let's look under the
hood and say what are the mechanisms of
action to your point about like we're
having a biological experience once you
understand that you're like oh we've
just cracked the code
on all mystical initiatory traditions
throughout time and space and here's the
code right you're like okay boost
endorphins
dopamine
nitric oxide and oxytocin in your system
increase
the endocannabinoids
in your system and your vagal nerve tone
right load up
load up your body with sensation right
it could be
alternating current direct current
magnetism sound vibration pain or orgasm
right use any of those or all of them
right and then and then in and then do
something it could be electrical
stimulation to the tongue it could be a
compound a pharmacological compound like
ketamine or nitrous oxide or even 5-meo
dmt they all push you into a low
delta wave brain state
right load up the system send a pulse of
energy through it and
and you end up with a complete brain
stem reset you delta waves are normally
not accessible during waking
consciousness they're usually only in
deep and dreamless sleep so very few
people know about them very few people
study them almost no one knows how to
get to them
and that signature and and you know in
karl deiseroth actually at stanford has
just done a fascinating study
on this and he's like he's like they had
um epileptic patients
who they gave ketamine for depression
and then tracked their brains and was
like okay you're having a dissociative
experience you're having a kind of
out-of-body experience when you have the
out-of-body experience it seems to
increase your health and well-being
and your ability to manage your
depression oh look it's at three hoods
which is super super low right normally
we're in beta which is way up high way
down in three hoods almost nodding off
almost effectively dying right decease
of brain activity
and
and wouldn't you know it now we can just
electrically stimulate you back to three
hertz no drugs
right just electrically stimulate
because now we've got the signature and
now you're having the same out of body
experience with the same anti-depressive
effects so you're like bingo so now it's
not about i don't drew drugs or i do or
i don't use technology or i do or i
don't believe in that deity or that
custom or that practice right you're
like oh no we've got the cheat codes and
the typical thing is is like in that
delta wave state and this is this is i
don't know why i mean i offer some
potential hypotheses at the end of the
book but
in that state you get
metric piles of information
you're basically surfing the cosmic
browser so those death rebirth
experiences that all the religious
traditions and all the mystical and
esoteric traditions that kept them under
wraps and kept them secret and cloaked
them in tons of crazy language you could
never decode you're like now anybody can
go and see for themselves
anybody can actually right have that
experience for themselves and it and
here's the back to the open source idea
let the mystery stay the mystery
we don't need to make up bunch of
stories because like most religion would
be somebody just happened to like get
the tumbler right open up you know open
up the ark of the covenant go hot damn
and then come running down the mountain
and be like guys guys you'll never
believe this i just had the most
wild-ass experience i think i'm going to
start a religion and then centuries
later you get priests and they're all
playing chinese you know the telephone
game and like it all gets gobbled it all
gets calcified and then people have lost
it
and then you end up with placebo
sacraments downstream that don't
recreate the original experience
so now we've got the cheat codes and now
everyone can go and see for themselves
and because when you're in that state
the information is
auto didactic it just seems to appear in
the order that you are capable of
perceiving it and apprehending it right
then you're like oh so we can just leave
all the storytelling
on a shelf
and you can believe whatever you want to
believe you can skin this
as a theist you can be like oh i've just
communicated with the angels and gods of
my pantheon you can skin this as a you
know as a rational materialist you're
like this is just a complex synaptic
activity in my mind and some interesting
fractal symmetries it's aesthetic it's
neat but i'm not going to assign a
goddamn thing to it right or you could
be agnostic like hey
i appear to be accessing an information
layer but i'm not going to presume to
define it
right so you can believe what you want
to believe
just never lose the faith right and
that's the the faith part is key
nevertheless the faith that what
just never lose the faith that
that
we are here
we are we are at choice
that that we are in choice i'm getting
more confused here by the word
well well i i'll unpack it right because
the reason the reason i came to that is
um
my college roommate his his grandfather
was a famous quaker theologian who was
the
minister at stanford he advised
eisenhower he was actually responsible
for undoing those japanese internment
camps and he has a beautiful
quote where he says faith
is not belief without proof
right but rather trust
without reservation
okay and so trust me what well here's
the thing right that's that is the
gnostic part you got a like zora neil
hurston right the the african-american
poet and anthropologist um she studied
with franz boaz and margaret mead back
in columbia back in the day she said you
gotta go there to know that
right the taoists say you know know ten
things tile nine
right so this is where though some of
this stuff starts to be in danger of
going over people's heads
so
i let me try to pull this down into
my layman terms here so
what i love about the way that this is
all laid out in the book is anchoring
around okay you're having a biological
experience
and
you
have uh
the human experience is such that
traumas will
begin to add up over time
or just a bad frame of reference
and the way that you're in what i mean
by frame of reference is the way that
you look at the world the story you have
told yourself about yourself and the way
the world works is no longer serving you
it's not functional
so
now you need a reset of some kind you
need something that knocks you out of
that frame of reference so that you talk
about this in the book you get that
little blue dot effect that the
astronauts got when they were looking
back at the earth and you realize oh my
god like it's also small it's also
insignificant
by stepping out of your frame of
reference you see that it is a frame of
reference so going back to david foster
wallace and this idea of this is water
you don't realize that the way that
you're perceiving yourself and the world
is
made up of choices beliefs things that
you perceive to be immutable are
actually
probably accidental choices that you
have made along the way
so we are going to use your
neurochemistry as influenced by your
body to
give you a view back that oh this
is all these are choices when i change
my neurochemistry i change the way i
feel one of the most astonishing things
in the book i i wrote this one down
because i was like i cannot believe this
is true that andrew huberman who i think
is amazing
did a
study with mice and found that mice when
they can
self-stimulate
would sooner self-stimulate
bravery and courage then they would
self-stimulate and have sex and i
thought oh my god like the and you talk
about how that's the whole ballgame
right dude that's insane to me and the
fact that you you said um there are
brain states where you feel more
resilient and you want to visit trauma
when you're in a brain state where you
feel more resilient and i was like that
is literally what i've been trying to
get people to understand is
dude you change one little thing in your
brain you can look at the same thing and
feel radically different and
that to me is
super intriguing now it's interesting
because i'm talking to the author you
obviously know better than me but even
hearing your argument i still believe
it's ridiculous but i still believe that
the whole sex thing um has a more
central part
to
that brain chemistry manipulation and
the reason it felt to me that you went
into such great depth is that there is
such great depth to go into when you
begin to understand how you can unlock
brain cells because i'm not a big drug
guy like i've done the um
ketamine oxytocin nasal spray and was
like it's basically like being drunk now
maybe i just didn't do it in the right
setting i didn't have intention that
actually is true and maybe all of that
would change it and i would feel
differently but anyway but the sex thing
like that's already a hugely important
part of my life
yeah and you give this one you go into
detail this one point about uh
that if a woman isn't necessarily
fully engaged in her sex life in general
one thing to start with is
15 minutes of clitoral stimulation
without
expecting reciprocity or for it to even
lead to orgasm or sex and that you said
over i forget what period of time but
days weeks or months i don't remember
how long um
that it begins to sort of
um
connect something
it's not quite that way
yeah that that's actually and i'm i
think it's probably still unpublished i
keep on pestering her this is dr nicole
prouse's work
um and she was a kinsey institute fellow
she was at harvard i think she did some
of her postdoc she was then at
ucla and now she's an independent
researcher and she's done some of the
more interesting and kind of cutting
edge work on
sexuality and especially women's
sexuality but not only on
basically orgasm as a replacement for
prescription pharmaceutical
right because if you and this you know
the trailer breadcrumbs that i was kind
of accidentally stumbled across was
i was giving a talk at the battery club
up in san francisco with jason silva and
rick goblin and it was all about
psychedelics and all these things and
then kind of in between a set break rick
and i were talking and i was obviously
always like i always picked the brain of
my like like my idols i'm like tell me
all this and here's all the questions i
have and you probably know the answers
right so um i was asking myself so
what's happening the neurochemistry of
the mdma trauma work
and what you know and he's like well
meaning that mdma helps people with
treatment yes and that's now in phase
three clinical trials and it's you know
and it's being given special access you
know as a special medicine intervention
because the results have been so strong
so effectively the fda is sort of fast
tracking it because it has such a power
to potential power to help people
and he's like well look it's it's high
vase or vasopress press and high prolact
and high oxytocin because you know the
closest analog we can think of or have
seen is is the post orgasmic state
and you're like and you read the studies
and the accounts of those people
suffering from trauma they're like oh my
gosh i had childhood sexual abuse or war
trauma or whatever it would be i've been
jacked up i haven't
ever i haven't felt joy or happiness or
a whole host of things we all deserve
and now i have
and now i realize that this is in me now
i realized yes it was the medicine but
it was also this is me and being able to
reclaim those parts of themselves of
just full feeling like oh my god like
that that makes you weep right it's just
profoundly
beautiful and hopeful
that folks who have been so banged up
and broken have a chance to heal and
you're like well wait a second you know
like
it's taken maps 30 years and
tens and even hundreds of millions of
dollars to navigate this process through
federal law to take a schedule one
substance and make it available and it's
moving faster and faster but there's
still lots of things that need to be
done and you're like but wait you know
how else could we get people to that
post-orgasmic state
and you realize oh
evolution through the kitchen sink at
pear bonding
right now that has created all the
taboos it has created tons of our trauma
and our suffering you know and lots of
pain
well just think i mean go back to helen
of troy on the face that lost a thousand
ships that sounds nice but that you know
the battle of troy wasn't so pretty you
know and right and think about rape
think about incest think about you know
unintended pregnancies i mean the stab
that blew my mind the simple one but
after doing all this research on
the evolution like the anthropology of
sexuality to realize that even today i
did double check the stats i thought i'd
misread it in the developed world
western europe and the united states
half of all pregnancies are accidents
so like half of us weren't supposed to
be here weren't welcomed by loving
parents celebrating our arrival it was a
oh whoops
and you just think of that and you're
like what if every child was a wanted
shadow
you know we can put men on the moon and
split atoms and we cannot figure out how
to modulate
our accidental desire to procreate it's
crazy
so you know jealousy infidelity divorces
betrayals all of it like evolution is
utterly immoral
it does not care
who we pledged what to when
all it wants to do is shake up the snow
globe and create the most you know the
most robust gene pool possible
and there's so many crazy dirty tricks
right i mean that notion of
you know when women are on the pill
right it messes up their endocrine
system and it lets puts them in a sort
of a broody state like i you know i i
feel like i'm pregnant so i'm not going
to conceive again and
um
they are drawn to
safe nurturing kind homekeeper kind of
guys and then they get married and then
they go oh we're we're married this is
okay now i'm gonna go off the pill and
then it's like
and they're like wait a second who's
this weak chin i'm gonna go
out and shag a biker like i want
testosterone i want danger i want
excitement and they go out and shag that
biker and once you know it they have you
know erica jones like zipless they
have an amazing hot and heavy one-night
stand they climax and when a woman
climaxes especially with a new partner
ovulation can slide 72 hours either
direction from her normal cycle oops
just got knocked up by a bit by a rough
and tumble baby daddy and now what
you know or the classic 40 year old guy
who's like ah
why am i all soft in the middle the rest
of my life is so hard like paul simon
101 i think i need to get a convertible
and a tattoo or an earring and wouldn't
you know it suddenly my little ea is
looking really sexy or maybe i just just
download tinder just to see and the next
thing i know
i'm blown up my wife and my life and my
family i'm in a seven figure bitter
divorce all because actually what
happened is my testosterone was dropping
at age 40 and the french call it la fer
de la cuandonten which is the affair of
the forties they got a name for it
you know and wouldn't you know it the
best thing to boost testosterone in a
male is sex with a novel
younger partner
and you're like oh my gosh if i could
now just send that email to a dozen of
my friends you know and take take 10
percent cut on this
on the alimony payments i'd be a rich
man i'd be retired
right so you're like just things like
that
where you're like okay so right now
we're puppets on a string right we're
just getting jerked around by those
incredibly potent evolutionary impulses
but what if we could hotwire evolution
what if you can say okay we've been
reproducing for a hundred thousand years
with no instruction manual this is very
very very strong in coding
and is responsible for most of our grief
and oh by the way jared diamond ucla
anthropologist wrote guns germs and
steel
makes a fascinating case that actually
human sexuality is so weird it is so
different the fact that we have sex
often
outside of ovulation the fact that men
have much much larger penises
proportional to body size than any other
even primates that women have big wide
you know curvy hips and full breasts
even when they're not lactating
right that women have frequent orgasms
there's a whole host of things that we
do and take for granted that almost no
other animal in the animal kingdom does
and you're like and his case was it was
as essential to advancing our higher
consciousness how we went from homo
erectus to homo sapiens as language and
tool-making
so you're like okay so now we're on to
something right this is there's
definitely a lot of like there's a lot
of easter eggs here so now can we say
what if we untied the puppet strings
what if we hotwired evolution and what
if we took that psychosexual capacity
the flooding of norepinephrine dopamine
endorphins oxytocin the slowering of
heart rates the increase in vagal nerve
tone all the things that pair bond us
and deliver us to transcendent and
interesting states and can we use that
as an engine for healing and growth
comparable to what rick dublin at maps
has been exploring with the mdma ptsd
therapy so you're like whoa
we could use this to heal each other
like it's one of the simplest ways for
humans to make each other feel really
good in a world that's often hard right
so at a minimum we could do that better
and at a maximum
every single mystical tradition i
wouldn't say every single because i'll
be wrong if i say that an awful lot
right of wisdom traditions around the
world
if you dig underneath the covers there's
a sexual yoga at the heart of those
mystery schools including christianity
including kabbalism including obviously
shaiva tantra hinduism tibetan buddhism
you name it right
where is the sex magic in christianity
oh my gosh i mean all over the place i
mean you see a polluted distorted
version of it in our current sex abuse
scandals in the church right celibacy is
a form of sex magic it's cultivating and
isolating but it kept jumping the tracks
in dysfunctional ways um there's all the
early gnostic christians
were
were you know arguably i mean a women
could be priests it was it was much more
egalitarian and there were sexual rights
and practices the western hemetic and
magical tradition all the way through
aleister crowley and some of the dudes
who kind of put it in the you know put
it in the ditch um the idea the concept
of errato comatose lucidity
you know errata just to do with
sexuality comatose lowering our you know
i mean technically lowering our
brainwaves out of conscious waking stuff
down into theta and delta and then
lucidity i'm still here
right i'm still awake i still have
consciousness that was the domain
so sexuality is a evolutionary
biological let's you know accidentally
or purposefully make babies
be
done together with a high trust loving
partner can be an amazing way to
discharge the day-to-day trauma and even
go deeper into healing and then see
potentially a
vehicle
trans personal experience
and like yes yes
is it a phenomenal story she's a tibetan
tantrica
and she was a total badass she was a
princess she ran away from home to to
ditch an arranged marriage she then did
like this trial of hercules she
ended up like fighting and beheading a
tiger she comes back to her home
province
dude well i mean she's a mythological
you know
this this is like a chick working in the
bronx now i was like wait a second
jenny on the block right so so she's she
um she was actually padmasambhava who
who who is one of the baddest ass like
tibetan um you know god men who brings
the dharma to tibet she was his consort
and in the legends she's the one who
woke up first right and actually
switched him on so she comes back to her
home province after being initiated as a
tantriquer and gets raped by seven
bandits
right but she's such a badass that that
that that the men all fall to their
knees weeping
like she just allows it
and they all fall to their knees weeping
and then pledge to be her body gods for
life
and like that story right is is is
beautiful in encapsulation i mean
including the fact that she denied the
socially defined roles she became an
initiate she transformed sexual violence
into loyalty and dedicated service and
then
woke up
the dude we all hear about parma samba
as one of the bringers of dharma
to all of tibet
so so a lot of the studies if
himself said he said uh you know a human
body is the strongest vehicle
for enlightenment versus kind of
asceticism or like starving yourself or
kind of denying it all she goes but if a
woman is inclined a woman's body is
better
so that kind of gets you back to that
old calypso tune you know that's right
that women are smarter
uh is there any explanation like are we
meant to take that literally or is that
a reference to like the divine
feminine versus the divine masculine
i mean gosh i have no idea
um but it for sure i mean if you just
take
you know a woman's role in conceiving
gestating and nursing life
it sure to me would seem that
that they've got an awful lot more going
on than we do
and even if you took a look at sexual
and biological response i mean there's a
fella who was um at harvard medical
school an ob gyn guy who said you know
women need a reason men just need a
place
kind of thing so like i mean you know
it's a lot of reductionism but in
general i would say men are simpler
you know and women have just an awful
lot more going on
and and is that possibly and you know
and they grow life right i mean that's
kind of pop back to why there have
always been not always but often taboos
around menstruation taboos around those
kind of things is because like what on
earth do you do we sure as hell can't
come anywhere near that magic
it's interesting to me that that
manifests as a taboo versus
manifesting is like whoa this must have
something to do with that incredibly
important thing that you do that without
which you know we would cease to exist
um yeah that's surprising i mean i guess
i shouldn't be too surprised
your
people are bound to take things in a
very weird way given enough sort of um
collisions enough people approaching it
that things will get bizarre but it's
weird to me that that's that borders on
universal
well i mean look to put it in
perspective i mean if you think about
even the prisoner experiment and things
like that you know that the one that has
since been critiqued as as that was it
stanley
pilgrim or pilgrim something like that
the stanford professor who did the
prison experiment of like you know make
people gods and prisoners and they you
know the gods treat people shittily
that was just an effort to figure out
what the happened
in nazi germany
right like world war ii was a crazy
thing and hannah arendt called it the
banality of evil right she was i think
she was at er like men's trial and she's
like wait a second these guys were just
bureaucrats
doing
horrible horrible things on behalf of
humanity so like to put it in
perspective
there's this pulitzer prize-winning book
called overstory it came out it was a
fiction it came out in 2019. it's a
beautiful book about this really about
hope and about growth and about trees
and all this kind of stuff but he has a
great phrase within there he's like he's
like to put this in perspective
anatomically modern man showed up at you
know if all of life on this earth was a
24-hour day
anatomically modern man shows up at four
seconds before midnight
cave paintings show up at one second
before midnight
and we've been playing the civilization
game for a fraction of a second
so to just give ourselves some humility
and a sense of we have no idea
what this monkeys with clothes game is
and we barely understand how we operate
or why we do what we do
or how to understand it or how to be
better at it or how to be born into this
life this nasty british and short and
harvest enough energy credits to stay
alive through you know feasts and famine
and winters and to then assign meaning
and purpose for ourselves and for each
other like and we're only just now
beginning to get a handle on it we're
like oh whoops looks like we might have
overclocked a whole bunch of things and
the pots are boiling over this is a
little like you know like mickey and the
sorcerer's apprentice you know like oh
yeah we're gonna we're gonna turn on
fossil fuels and nuclear power and we're
gonna get us do all our dishes and then
we're like oh no things are getting a
little out of hand
so so to just give us some
some tenderness and some forgiveness
you know like like like back to your
your political thing of like you know
it's both it's liberal and conservative
like is it free mark is is it is it free
markets or social safety nets you know
is is it supply-side economics like
keynes or or or
or um you know or free markets like
milton friedman is it revolution or
evolution is it church or state you know
is it carrots or sticks in in national
policy like you know we don't know
we're not sure
you know we can't even figure out
whether like eggs and butter and coffee
are like awesome or are going to murder
us in our sleep
you know like so so give us ourselves i
think we all get a mulligan
to
forgive ourselves and each other
and to keep on keeping on and there is
you i think you you know you rightly
said hey wait this is getting a little
abstract and esoteric right like let's
ground this
and and i think the simplest is
the idea of
when we have the capacity like life life
hurts we know that it can it's tragic
but and that and that's that'll beat us
down if that's all we've got it's
sometimes magic
right and that's easier to forget
and and and when we find ourselves whip
sold between those two he's like all you
can do is kind of laugh you can be like
that's the cosmic joke and then it's
comic
and we share it with each other right we
share those laughs at the absurdity of
this song
right like it makes me think about what
you talk about in the book which is
really interesting
the concept of the trickster
yes what did you mean by that
well i mean
you know this um
it was it actually came out of elaine
pagel she's a scholar at princeton um
she's one of the baddest us
uh religious scholars i think in the
world actually and she was
one of the original translators of the
nag hamadi scrolls that
when she was over at oxford and they
were these like indiana jones papyrus
things like hidden gospels the gospel of
magdalen the gospel of thomas all these
other ones that what that didn't make it
into the canonical bibles
and tell a completely different story of
first century christianity and it's way
rather much much more interesting
um you know and again like women's
priest and sexuality and music and odd
very bohemian and very mystic and
initiatory and then you know and then
paul takes it and he's like oh no
that that'll never scale you know let
everybody in jew gentile like pack him
deep sell him cheap pass the collection
plate like that's how we grow this thing
and so we got robbed of that whole
living lineage
but
she also piggles took a look back at
the old testament and specifically the
book of job and job's that famous story
where satan and and yahweh have this bet
and and yahweh is like see he's my he's
my man he does everything he says he's a
pious dude and saying he's like ah yeah
he's only doing that because
his life is awesome like you know see
how faithful he is when
fortune turns away so yahweh then goes
and kicks the out of joby right and
nothing good happens to the dude and
joey gets really pissed off and all this
kind of stuff and this is kind of one of
these weird old testament stories that
people try and make sense of but in
pagel's scholarship she found out that
in fact there were at least a couple of
authors across spread across centuries
and that the first version didn't have
satan in it it was just yahweh being
addicted to job
and right and that's a hard one if
you've established that your god is all
powerful and all good
right if he's all good he wouldn't do
such shitty things if he was and but if
he wasn't powerful then then then he
wouldn't be able to prevent them
and and and this became this weird
splinter in the mind of western
spirituality and philosophy
and what it led to was essentially that
author number two had to create satan
because he's like this doesn't pencil
out it doesn't make any sense so he put
in this plot device of satan the opposer
and then that all cascades down
to you know 20th century you look at the
auschwitz problem how could god
right both be all powerful and allow the
gas chambers to happen and if he did he
wasn't good
if he was good he would never let that
happen what do we do with this and what
we had and and in that that western
tradition created a schizophrenic split
where the like god is all powerful and
all good everything happens for a reason
all the bad has to be the force it
has to be the actions of some other dark
force and pagel's i mean it's it's
heartbreaking but it was the it's the
source of her wisdom
she lost her six-year-old son
to a congenital disease and she lost her
husband to a freak mountaineering
accident in aspen within 12 months
within 12 months
so she's like okay so
i am wrecked with grief and i'm this
profound scholar of this western
tradition how do i look to these texts
and make sense of this and she's like
you know western theologians talk about
the problem of evil as if bad isn't
baked into the script
she's like no other tradition does this
you look at the greek gods right the
greek gods do all kinds of awesome stuff
and they bring fire to men and gifts and
all these kind of things but they're
also fickle and petty and jealous right
they're vengeful they do all the things
right and they're just like the people
that worship them
and you look at indigenous traditions
like tome and you know and and and the
brah rabbit you know even bugs bunny is
a descendant right of actually west
african trickster mythologies
and the ideas of the tricksters in fact
um
neil gaiman's book uh american gods
there's a tv show about it right now as
well and i was watching it and there's
this colonial woman and a leprechaun
shows up he's actually like six foot six
he's a giant dude but he shows up and
he's a leprechaun and she's like oh
you're one of the fairy folk i want to
thank you so much for all the amazing
things you've done and he's like ah you
know you know we were like
we're like the wind baby we blow both
ways
good and ill
and that idea that
life is tragic and magic it's not just
perfect and it's not just hashtag
universe everything happens for a reason
allows us to take the hits without
having a an
ontological break in our mind without
tearing
our mind when our hearts break
because if people subscribe to the
secret or see people subscribe to new
thought you can see this with pandemic
and qanon you can see that mind virus
like this is the back door it goes in
which is
everything has to be happening for a
reason and everything that i can't
explain has to be the work of dark and
sinister forces
over there
versus
good luck bad luck
who knows
and so reintroducing the trickster like
when we try and suppress that trickster
energy when we try and suppress the
random and fickle and unknowable nature
of existence
right we tend to create
more trauma we tend to create more
heartache
versus just bearing witness
in the not knowing of it all
all right so
this is also
it's such a fresh take
now
let's put it back in context of this
idea of hey maybe we can use all these
tools
understand our neurochemistry understand
where religion comes from understand
that something like the devil is a plot
device that you add to this
and yet we have this need to make this
meaning we have a need to get control of
our neurochemistry we have a need to
explore our bodies if for no other
reason than to recognize that we have a
perspective a frame of reference is
either helping us or it's not and now
you talk about this omega moment which i
think is that fall right so we
we drop to
you know that potential end that is part
of the death and rebirth cycle put in
put in a more spiritual context where
you were talking about all these
traditions have this death and reverse
rebirth notion in the way that even an
orgasm is low petite mort right the
little death
okay so we've got that grand context
we've got to do the work we've got to
reconnect to our body we have to um
understand that we are just as prone to
sort of
the banality of evil as anybody else
because we are an ape with clothes uh
and
now though we're
we want to transcend all of that to
become
something that's more um globally minded
so how do we take everything that we
just learned over the last two hours
and
um connected to this idea and i i think
you'll have to put a very fine point on
what it is like what is the omega point
and then how do we
use that as like the springboard into
something better
yeah well i mean i think the simplest
right
i i wouldn't it wouldn't be
intellectually honest to like unpack
rapture ideologies and say anything that
has a hockey stick happily ever after is
you know suspect
and then just you know like um take the
piss out of all of those and then just
smuggle in one at the end
it's structurally identical just new
rapper right like that wouldn't work so
my senses is that there's there's no
place to go
right this is this is it this is the
freedom of no escape because we're at a
moment of crisis i'm just this is
seconds
well just i mean i mean yes that like
that can say hey you know
maybe you don't want to spend the rest
of your time youtube binging or
netflixing like like there's purpose
where where the time is now and and our
contributions matter but i wouldn't say
with because because that that evie
white thing of like i'm torn i wake up
in the morning torn between the desire
to save the world or savor it
right and and that can make it hard to
plan the day that's right that's kind of
where we are but that's good man i've
never heard that before oh check it out
but but his next sentence is even better
he says and then i conclude that in fact
the savoring has to come first
because if there was nothing to savor
right there was nothing worth savoring
there would be nothing worth
saving so we right we have to come back
to you and howard thurman right the
theologian that inspired martin luther
king
right he has a beautiful quote it's a
little bit instagram hashed at this
point but um he says don't ask yourself
what the world needs
ask yourself what makes you come alive
because what the world needs is more of
us who have come alive
right and so that gets back to the death
rebirth thing
so what it can look like over time and
this actually happened this happened to
me and julie my wife we were having a
big ass fight over the kitchen table and
she was super pissed about or just still
hurt like legitimately hurt about things
just up you know careless
things i done in like at age 18
to 21 when we just met
you know like it was still in the
foundations of our relationship and on
the other hand we've been having all
these wonderful magical experiences and
it felt like and i was like hey we've
already won like we've done this like
everything's redeemed that got us here
why are you still stuck back there come
on up with me which is kind of my
classic move come on up here right like
i don't want to deal with back there
come up here and i just kind of had this
vision i was like oh it looks like a
jesus fish right it looks like that kind
of classic bumper sticker like the nose
of the fish is where we're born and
where the two lines cross is kind of the
tail and where we all die
and all of us have that biographic life
right we all have the arc of our life
and along the way we take hits those are
our traumatic events
if we're lucky
from time to time we'll have a peak
experience and that could be a campout
where you saw shooting stars it could be
your first rock concert where
everybody's holding up their lighters or
these days their phones not nearly as
cool
right and you're like yeah we're all
singing along and we were all one
together it could be you know your first
true love whatever it was you have a
peak experience and you're like i
cherish that but i don't really know
what it was or how to get back there
right but then you have another one
you're like okay
sweet i thought that was a one and done
i'm super glad i'm back here again still
nothing then the third time three points
make a line that line makes a trend that
trend makes a plot and you're like oh
i might actually have a kind of a
mythic life that is this complement to
my biographic life
right and every time i have a peak
experience i feel
inspiration like woohoo
and i experience a
forgetting of the forgetting i remember
who i am up here i remember my deepest
purpose and i also actually quite often
get like a printout of like and here's
the places all you're banged up and
broken and out of integrity
right so i'm like ah now i can go back
and i can start mending
those trauma points because i'm filled
with juice right now but i've got a love
to spare this goes back to that
supersaturated neurochemistry right i
feel expensive i feel safe i feel
resourced and i can actually go back and
do some of the work i've been i've been
avoiding or have just been too
blocked
to get to now when we have that
experience you have to you first start
articulating your mythic life and this
is true for lots of people in the new
age space the conscie space the
psychedelic renaissance you name it
they're like ah i like it up here
i'm not going back i'm never going back
right it's like apocalypse now you know
like like and and you get stuck in a
spiritual bypass
so i quit my job i changed my name i
start wearing long flowy stuff and
excessive jewelry and you know and and
flowy sandals we go to cacao ceremonies
and sound buffs and you're like no
that's not it either
right and and something that happens
there is that we'll have a breakthrough
on our mythic ark
and we'll be like oh my gosh i'm a new
person like i now understand all the
things that i was doing that were broken
wrong out of whack whatever and you come
back home
quite often to a spouse or a partner
family kids whatever the people who have
been with you along and you're like hey
guess what great news everybody i'm a
new person and they're like you you
know and you're like oh you don't get it
you don't you don't understand i'm
absolutely amazing and you know the
classic is the you know saul the tax
collector on the road to damascus
becomes paul
right he's like hey baby you know i
understand i mean i was a son of a
and i collected everybody's taxes even
when they didn't have any money and
but i'm paul now can't you see and what
happens is we get out of time with each
other
so our
leading edge in our ecstatic life or our
mythic life
gets yet gets crosswise to the people
around us the people who love us their
bleeding edge
the place back in time where we wounded
them or hurt them or broke their trust
and they're not willing to sign off on
our leading edge until we're willing to
come back and make amends and a tone and
help them at their bleeding edge
and so that's the beautiful human part
like we don't have lineages anymore we
don't have you know trustworthy gurus
and teachers to defer to but we do have
each other
right and so we can use that and then
over time if we do the work we can raise
our biographic life and we can bend down
our mythic life and then they come to
that intersection at the fish's tail
right and that's the place where we can
die and be reborn again
that is the place of becoming that
that's the resurrection practice that's
the place where we're like oh
okay
now instead of me trying to escape
my mundane existence i'm coming back to
it and i'm coming back to with fresh
eyes and an open heart and gratitude so
you see this is dorothy and wizard of oz
there's no place like home right she
comes back to that broke-ass dusty ranch
in kansas and she's like wait tin man
and scarecrow you're like you guys are
the wrong chance oh my gosh you've been
here all along it's jimmy stewart in a
wonderful life
right i died and was reborn the angel
visited me and i come back it's ebenezer
scrooge on christmas morning we have i
mean the stories are everywhere
and the key is that at what point do we
stop
trying to escape or transcend or bypass
this human experience and instead we
come back to it with tears of gratitude
and
fearless
commitment
and and the best example i think in the
traditions is the zen oxiding parables
right which is
there are these ten beautiful penis
sketches you know mapping out the path
of enlightenment and and i remember
reading it i was like oh this is
super awesome let me where is it without
what's the road map and and i got to
number four and that was what four of 10
and that was the end that was when you
get enlightenment and i was like wait i
thought that was the end how the hell is
this panel for what happens next and
then there were like all these crazy
esoteric zen distinctions that i didn't
really understand at that time and then
but panel number ten
it it's this fat dude with a you know
like like a buddha dude with a walking
stick and it says it says
even
his his doors and windows are locked
even the wisest sages and scholars
cannot find him he is down in the
marketplace among the people with
helping hands
so you're like when the extraordinary
can become absolutely ordinary
and when we can come back to this life
not looking to wiggle off the hook but
to willingly step up on the cross
and to say
this like like that our humanity
right is only realized and expressed at
the intersection
of our divinity and our mortality
right that we are here with beating
hearts that we get knocked down but we
get back up again that we testify
with redemption songs
right like that's soul force like that's
the thing
and we know it i mean think about
beyonce i'm a survivor you think about
dolly parton you think about the
grateful dead you think about gospel
jazz soul blues like
those answers are in our living
scriptures they're in our american
songbook
it's like this secret hermetic tradition
right about how do we do this thing and
we've been making ought about it for
centuries so like we already know we
like all the tools are all around us and
it's just time to kind of dust them off
freshen them up put them back together
and then share them
man well said
well said
brought all together the the book man
was really really incredible
thank you so much for taking the time
where can people um hang out with you
online or get the book
yeah well i mean i think the simplest is
recapture the rapture.com
and that's the hum for the book but it's
also for the toolkit there's all kinds
of you know access and things that
people can use and take away there's
chances to plug in with community trains
support different research projects all
that kind of stuff there so recapture
the rapture.com
we're on instagram at flow genome so
floww
genome for both instagram and facebook
and then an intermittent series on
clubhouse on friday afternoons uh by the
name recapture the rapture as well
nice i love it well brother thank you so
much for joining me and by the way guys
speaking of things that you will love if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
[Music]
you